# Annotated Bibliography

*Instructions:*
Using the template below (you can copy/paste) add an entry to this annotated bibliography. A good annotated bibliography entry synthesizes the paper's message, rather than re-wording the abstract. This is a good place to practice reading papers critically. Most papers are motivating and presenting an argument, they tend to have a message and a point of view. Even if the details are highly technical, papers are still required to present a logical argument. As you read, try to identify what claims are being made and assess the validity of the claims. A good starting point is looking for self-consistency between what the paper states as its goals and what is actually being done -- i.e. does it hang together?

Some questions to ask as you read:

1. Are the starting assumptions appropriate for the questions the paper wishes to address?
2. Are the methods/measurements representative of the system described by the starting assumptions? For ex, are they comparing apples to apples?
3. Do the results support the claims being put forth? Are there alternative interpretations you can come up with?
4. Are the claims relevant to the motivation?

> To be eligible for points, uploads should be committed with a commit message title "BIB CONTRIBUTION - [NAME]" with a brief commit description of topic keywords. You are welcome to split the work and credit with a classmate, simply put multiple names in the commit title so that total points can be split between contributors. 

Template:
```
[(Author et. al, year)](url to ads abstract link) *Paper Title*

Paragraph: Summary of the main point of the paper, in your view.
Insights/things of interest in the contents. 

Paragraph: Relationship to the course material (be specific as possible).
 
(Optional Paragraph: Questions you had while reading,
 salient connections to other papers we've talked about)
```

[Hutton et. al, 2015](https://ui.adsabs.harvard.edu/abs/2015MNRAS.452.1412H/abstract)
*Variations of the dust properties of M82 with galactocentric distance*

This paper presents the study of dust properties in the starburst galaxy M82, using NUV and optical to analyze the dust properties. They focus on the extinction curve parametrized by the strength of a specific 2175 angstrom feature across different galactocentric distances. They find from their spatial distribution of parameters relating to the dust that there is a significant gradient in extinction with galactocentric distance. This suggests that the center of M82 exhibits an attenuation law similar to the Milky way, while the outer regions extinction curves have features that are in line with smaller dust grain sizes.

This paper has a very similar foundation as our first homework from week 1 of class. If one were to do a deep dive into how varying parameters could affect extinction curves (like HW1) this would be a detailed basis for values to try (power law and dust size leads to different features in this study, those are two that we had to vary in our homework). 


[Zafar et. al, 2019](https://ui.adsabs.harvard.edu/abs/2019MNRAS.490.2599Z/abstract)
*Silicon and iron dust in gamma-ray burst host galaxy absorbers*

This study examines 23 GRB spectra, in an attempt to understand the chemical composition of interstellar dust grains. A lot of interstellar iron is locked in silicate grains, which leads to an increase in the amount of large grains with low amounts of silicon and iron depletion. This, combined with the fact that a majority of their samples show featureless extinction curves, indicates that these elements play a role in inducing the entire extinction at any wavelength (lack of these elements = no features in the curve). Another point that supports this claim is the correlation between an extinction ratio and column densities of Si and Fe. Again this connects the abundance of Si and Fe to the observed extinction. When extending to far-UV, they found no correlation between extinction and Si-Fe abundance, meaning that far-UV extinction could be from the combined effect of small grains of various types. 

In week one of class, we were assigned homework to investigate the effects of various parameters on an ISM extinction curve. One of the parameters was dust composition. Using this kind of paper, one wouldn’t have to guess and check when varying dust composition - they could use more informed guesses.


[Guillet et. al, 2020])(https://ui.adsabs.harvard.edu/abs/2020A%26A...634L..15G/abstract)
*Polarized emission by aligned grains in the Mie regime: Application to protoplanetary disks observed by ALMA*

This study uses a dust model for calculating polarized emission by grains that are up to 1mm in size. They then compare their predictions to polarization observation in protoplanetary disks. A big emphasis from this paper is the importance of the grain shape, spinning dynamics, and composition in the Mie regime. All of these properties have a large impact on polarization properties. Another important note from this paper is that the orientation of polarization observed in some protoplanetary disks can be explained by the transition from positive to negative polarization, meaning that for grains up to submillimeter size, the polarization is parallel to the magnetic field.

Similar to what we discussed in class during week 7, this paper discusses the polarization of grain emissions. It goes into more detail about how the actual grain size affects orientation of polarization.


[Gholipour, 2024](https://ui.adsabs.harvard.edu/abs/2024NewA..10702159G/abstract)
*Dynamical behavior of ambipolar diffusion during the gravitational collapse of a radiative cooling filamentary cloud*

This paper outlines the dynamics of ambipolar diffusion during the gravitational collapse of a filamentary molecular cloud going radiative cooling. A major variable in this study is the polytropic exponent which is a complex function which takes into account gas and dust temperature, velocity, radiation intensity, and chemical makeup. The major finding is that ambipolar diffusion decreases the flux to mass ratio in the outer regions of the filament regardless of polytropic exponent. However, in the central regions, if the polytropic exponent is greater than some threshold (0.8), a significant temperature increase occurs, which halts gravitational collapse. This discovery aligns with previous studies of star formation rate for polytropic exponents greater than 0.8.

In week 7, we quickly went over a case of ambipolar diffusion, going through some equations that describe it. This paper takes what we talked about conceptually and applies it. It is interesting to see how much ambipolar diffusion affects this variable (polytropic exponent), that drastically affects star formation behavior.


[Nguyen et. al 2024](https://ui.adsabs.harvard.edu/abs/2024MNRAS.530..984G/abstract)
*Effects of grain magnetic properties and grain growth on synthetic dust polarization of MHD simulations of low-mass Class 0/I YSOs*

This study explores the effects of magnetic properties and growth of grains on dust polarization in Magnetohydrodynamic simulations of low-mass YSOs. They use a non-ideal MHD simulation of a collapsing protostellar core, and analyze the impact of including iron and grain growth on thermal dust polarization. Superparamagnetism is a form of magnetism which appears in small ferromagnetic nanoparticles, and they find that superparamagnetic grains beyond ~500au can produce high polarization degrees from the protostar due to alignment via a magnetically enhanced torque mechanism. Grains within 500au from the protostar experience lower polarization, as they are aligned with the magnetic field by a radiative alignment torque only, not the magnetically enhanced torque. Finally, the last relevant bit of info is that they find that as grain size decreases, alignment decreases, leading to a polarization “hole”.

In week 7 of class, we talked about MHDs and grain polarization. I found this paper particularly interesting, because it combined both of those topics. It also extends past what we talked about in class, into the scenario of magnetized grains effect on polarization. Finding that our talk on grain polarization may have been a bit short due to time restriction (only talking about absorption and emission effects on polarization), this paper built on that topic, and introduced new considerations not touched on in class.


[Bhandare et. al, 2018](https://ui.adsabs.harvard.edu/abs/2018A%26A...618A..95B/abstract)
*First core properties: from low- to high-mass star formation*

This paper presents a study on molecular cloud core collapse, and the formation of first and second hydrostatic cores during star formation. Their model utilizes realistic gas equations of state, and radiative transfer coupled with hydrodynamics to simulate Larson’s collapse, with the goal of understanding the properties of first and second cores across a variety of initial cloud properties. Some of the findings are that various first core properties rely on initial cloud mass, with a transition region at the intermediate-mass regime. Low-mass protostars evolve through distinct stages of first and second hydrostatic core formation, while high-mass cloud cores rapidly evolve through the first collapse phase to form second Larson cores. Finally, they reveal that the transition region where first core properties significantly change is around 8-10 solar masses.

This paper was actually referenced in class during week 6. Considering that we talked about first and second cores in class just before midterm week, I was definitely not in a place to fully grasp this subject. Coming back to this paper helped me understand the mechanisms behind core collapse, and gave good detail about the difference between the various core stages.


[Zier et. al, 2021](https://ui.adsabs.harvard.edu/abs/2021ApJ...915....7Z/abstract)
*On the Interaction of a Bonnor–Ebert Sphere with a Stellar Wind*

A Bonnor–Ebert sphere is a frequently utilized theoretical model in protostellar core simulations. It describes an isothermal, spherically symmetric gas distribution that is self-gravitating, in hydrostatic equilibrium, and maintained by the pressure of the surrounding medium.  This paper focuses on their interaction with stellar wind, and how low-mass star formation can be triggered. The main finding of this paper is that: based on the equation of hydrostatic equilibrium and isothermal equation of state, they are able to develop a new criteria for stability within a Bonnor-Ebert sphere. Through simulations, they were able to find that for specific ranges of radius of the sphere, the simulation was unable to trigger gravitational collapse. Over this threshold, simulations were able to achieve gravitational collapse, confirming the new criteria’s validity.

The main point of this paper for me was not as much of what their results were criteria wise, but how in depth they talk about their Bonnor-Ebert sphere. In week 5, we briefly talked about BES’s, but going through their equations, I wasn’t really able to conceptualize what it was. This paper definitely helped me understand better what they are and how they are used, and the vast amount of theory behind them.


[Nunez et. al, 2017](https://ui.adsabs.harvard.edu/abs/2017ApJ...836..204N/abstract)
*Modeling for Stellar Feedback in Galaxy Formation Simulations*

This paper presents a model representing the three major phases of a supernova, and how star formation is affected by this supernova. This feedback model distributes energy to the surrounding medium throughout the three phases, with the majority of energy transferred to gas particles during the energy-conserving and snowplow phases. Their  model effectively suppresses early star formation, which leads to a younger stellar population and increased gas outflow rate. Their model also leads to a flatter disk structure and a steady star formation rate, which agrees with observations. Additionally, their model creates a galactic “fountain” where gas kicked out by supernova remnants eventually falls back onto the galaxy. 

In week three of class we discussed the three phases of a supernova, and detailed the equations that cover the mechanics of these phases. This paper builds on that and talks about how the phases actually affect star formation around them, which is something we didn’t get to talk about in class. It is interesting to make connections between the equations and discussions we had in class, and the more in depth look at how each phase has different stellar feedback.



[Da Rio et. al, 2017] (https://ui.adsabs.harvard.edu/abs/2017ApJ...845..105D/abstract)
*IN-SYNC V. Stellar Kinematics and Dynamics in the Orion A Molecular Cloud*

A continuation of the IN-SYNC survey of the Orion A star forming region. This paper focuses on the kinematic behaviors of the population, derived from radial velocities. A major finding from this study includes the fact that the young stellar population remains kinematically tied to the molecular gas, following a gradient along the filament. Another big finding is that there is evidence of sub-clustering, which means that there are significant groupings of neighboring stars with coherent motions in relation to each other. Some conclusions were drawn about the Orion Nebula Cluster, which was shown to be more dynamically evolved, and there is evidence of it expanding.

This paper was the main course for my midterm presentation. It presents specific kinematic behaviors of different YSO groups within Orion A, and conclusions drawn from those. Of these conclusions, the main point I wanted to make in my presentation, which was something we talked about in class, was the stars’ behavior in relation to the gas it was born from. From this study, they found younger populations that were still significantly kinematically bonded to the molecular gas it came from. Along with this, it found that there was an older population that no longer followed its molecular gas. 


[Da Rio et. al, 2015](https://ui.adsabs.harvard.edu/abs/2016ApJ...818...59D/abstract)
*IN-SYNC IV. The Young Stellar Population in the Orion A Molecular Cloud*

A continuation of the IN-SYNC survey of the Orion Molecular Cloud, this paper measures stellar parameters for YSO’s (effective temperature, radial velocity, etc.) along with extinctions. This paper goes further, placing their objects on the HRD, and finds a correlation between HRD inferred ages and spectroscopic surface-gravity inferred ages. A significant spread in stellar radii, along with correlation between ages and extinctions suggest relatively long duration of star formation throughout the region. One major finding from this paper is focussing on a specific cluster that was thought to be separate and in the foreground of Orion A. They confirm that the cluster is older and has low extinction, but its measured radial velocity is the same as Orion A’s population, so they determine that this cluster is actually a part of Orion A’s star forming region.

My midterm presentation was on the behavior of YSO’s in star forming regions. As I aimed to narrow down which behavior I wanted to talk about, I found that this paper had great detail about radial velocities, including how they measured them from the population. I used this paper as the basis for how radial velocities are measured, and the insights that can be gained from them.


[Cottaar et. al, 2014](https://ui.adsabs.harvard.edu/abs/2014ApJ...794..125C/abstract)
*IN-SYNC I: Homogeneous Stellar Parameters from High-resolution APOGEE Spectra for Thousands of Pre-main Sequence Stars*

This is the first paper in a series that presents various analyses of young stellar objects (YSOs). This one in particular presents spectral and photometric observations, and aims to derive the stellar dynamical state of the YSOs, while characterizing uncertainties in the spectral parameters. As the first paper in the series, this one more broadly describes the pipeline used to derive various parameters, along with generous detail on the sources of uncertainty. They present effective temperatures, surface gravities, radial velocities, and rotational velocities, along with how they measure accuracy of these measurements. In the context of my midterm presentation, I used this paper to establish a background on the properties used to characterize YSO’s, which helped me decide which property to further investigate for my presentation. 


[Nishimura et. al, 2014](https://ui.adsabs.harvard.edu/abs/2015ApJS..216...18N/abstract)
*Revealing the physical properties of molecular gas in Orion with a
large scale survey in J = 2–1 lines of 12CO, 13CO and C18O*

This paper presents high-resolution emission observations for the Orion A and B giant molecular clouds. It compares these observations to previously established J=1-0 emissions to map the spatial distributions of gas, and to derive gas densities and temperatures. With their maps, they note high temperature regions at cloud edges which indicate interactions with stellar winds and radiation from massive stars. They also find a correlation between gas density and star formation efficiency. High intensity ratios of the two observed transitions near HII regions and cloud boundaries suggest that these regions are warmer and have dense gas. This indicates active stellar regions influence the physical conditions of the surrounding molecular gas, highlighting the impact of stellar activity on molecular gas and star formation with the Orion clouds.

My midterm presentation was on the kinetic properties of YSO’s in star forming regions. In order to learn about this topic, I first needed to find out what tracers were used, and it was 13CO emissions. To learn about these types of emissions, I read this paper which helped me learn about the distributions of this gas within the same star forming region I was looking at for my project. 


[Slavin, 2024](https://ui.adsabs.harvard.edu/abs/2024JPhCS2742a2028S/abstract)
*Methods and Challenges of Including Dust Evolution in Magnetohydrodynamic Simulations*

In this article, the author discusses the methods and how complex it is to simulate dust evolution in the ISM within MHD simulations. As discussed in class, dust is crucial in influencing the thermal state of the ISM through photoelectric heating, cooling of gas, etc. This article says that including dust is challenging because of the complexity of grain-grain interactions, and the impact that shocks have on altering grain size distributions- also something we discussed in class. They present some methods for including dust in MHD simulations, but the one that seems to be the “best” is a mixture of a tight coupling approximation for small grains, and a kinetic treatment for large grains. The tight coupling approximation would simulate the grain-grain collisions, while the kinetic treatment would replicate the change in grain gyro speed due to shocks. 

This article included several topics we have discussed in class. It briefly touches on heating and cooling mechanisms of the ISM, and gives more detail on dust growth and grain destruction, and grain size distributions. This is a more in depth look at the actual technicality behind simulating some of the things we have learned about dust

[Patra et. al, 2024](https://ui.adsabs.harvard.edu/abs/2024MNRAS.529.4037P/abstract)
*The temperature of the neutral interstellar medium in the Galaxy*

This paper investigates the temperature and properties of the ISM, focusing on atomic gas, specifically, the absorption of H I. They find that the warm neutral medium (WNM) dominates the majority of their sightlines, and also are able to back up calculations for a column density threshold for the cold neutral medium. They further explore the two-temperature model and find that, along their sightlines, the classical two-temperature model fails to reproduce their observations. They have to extend the temperatures for the CNM in order to get results consistent with their observations. These results suggest that there is a more complex temperature distribution in the ISM. 

In class we talked in depth of the heating and cooling mechanisms within the ISM, and how absorption studies lead to the conclusion of two temperature regimes, the CNM and WNM, along with their corresponding temperatures. This paper challenges this established model by saying that under this strict model, their observations were not reproducible, so maybe there is a more complex distribution than we learned in class. 


[Schneider et. al, 2024](https://ui.adsabs.harvard.edu/abs/2024A%26ARv..32....2S/abstract)
*The formation and cosmic evolution of dust in the early Universe: I. Dust sources*

This review article focuses on the formation of evolution of dust in the early Universe (within 1.5 billion years after the Big Bang. It focuses more so on theoretical models of dust production in the ISM, by considering sources such as supernovae and asymptotic giant branch (AGB) stars. They find that the complexity of dust production and destruction are influenced by factors such as initial mass function, metallicity, and the dynamics within supernova remnants. They also discuss how supernovae are initially the primary dust producers, but AGB stars’ contributions catch up, as they are heavily influenced by the initial mass function. They conclude with the typical discussion of how more advanced models and observations are required to refine their understanding of dust production.

In class we have talked about dust in the context of their absorption/emission, and how to grow dust. This paper provides context on the steps before those can even occur, as it is how dust even comes to be. It provides more insight into the mechanisms that create the dust that we, in class, discuss its evolution. 


[Kritsuk et. al. 2021](https://arxiv.org/abs/1309.5926) 
*A supersonic turbulence origin of Larson's laws*

The paper takes measurements made out of ISM simulations and attempts to understand how Larson's law hold up. It describes the simulations in detail, and discusses specific effects such as gravity, and their relevance to the outcomes of the simulations. The paper determines that Larson's laws do indeed hold up at larger scales on the 0.1 - 50 pc order, and are a sign of kinetic energy entering a system. It takes the importance of molecular clouds in star formation theory, and works to understand how turbulence and gravity align with Larson's laws, 

This paper obviously discusses Larson's laws, of which we discussed the size-linewidth relation in class. As discussed in class, Larson found the relation as a result of a molecular cloud's internal velocity dispersion, cloud size, and mass. The clouds are theorized to have formed due to regular gravitational turbulence, as well as supersonic turbulence, which we were better able to understand through the example of a SNe remnant.


[Bonilla-Barroso et. al. 2022](https://ui.adsabs.harvard.edu/abs/2022MNRAS.511.4801B/abstract) 
*Gravity or turbulence V: star-forming regions undergoing violent relaxation*

In this paper, Bonilla-Barroso et. al. explore star cluster formation through simulations, particularly testing two different formation scenarios - a turbulent scenario (TC), and a chaotic collapse scenario. The authors take these scenarios and model them against data of the Orion Nebula Cluster (ONC), of Stars and Planet Formation classroom fame. This is relevant as there is a predominant idea that the formation of the stars in the ONC occurred through a turbulent process. To compare the star cluster formation scenarios, the authors took types of simulations, three runs for each scenario, and used empirical data selected a total of 1989 stars from a selected ONC region, noting their parallax, proper motions, masses, ages, and effective temperatures, using the GAIA-EDR3.
they found that the the global collapse simulations had a relatively flat velocity dispersion. The turbulence simulations showed a range in velocity dispersions, with higher velocity dispersions being associated with higher mass stars, showing a clear difference between the collapse and turbulence scenarios! The ONC histograms also show relatively flat velocity dispersion with no relationship to the masses binned, which visually looked a lot like the collapse scenario. 

I found this paper to be extremely clear to read (thanks Aleksandra!) The paper itself discusses the gravitational collapse vs turbulence star formation scenarios that we discussed in class, and puts them to the test against empirical data (from the ONC which we also learned about in class). This method of comparison is a lot easier on my brain than having to explicitly try and interpret results from a simulation standing on its own. The paper also briefly touches on concepts that are integral to understanding how overdensities play a role in forming stars, namely Larson's law and the Jeans mass. The paper had a clear goal and took the reader from start to finish, and I would highly recommend reading this to see how what we have learned practically applies.


[(Ballesteros-Paredes et. al, 2020)](https://ui.adsabs.harvard.edu/abs/2020SSRv..216...76B/abstract) *From Diffuse Gas to Dense Molecular Cloud Cores*

This paper summarizes current knowledge of molecular clouds (MC) by describing cloud formation, discussing the tools to understand their dynamics, and describing their connection to star formation. The authors link MC properties and lifecycles to their galactic environments, explore the calculations and numerical simulations that investigate MC formation, break down cloud statistics, and look at cloud substructure. The paper supplements and expands on several topics we’ve covered in the course so far, including H2 molecule formation; the use of the virial theorem to describe MC physical states and associated caveats; some MC ensemble properties; interstellar radiation and Habing units; the Salpeter power IMF; the prestellar core mass function; and more. The inclusion of observational and simulation data to visualize certain concepts helps drive them home. Since this paper is in the form of a review, it doesn’t necessarily present a singular argument but uses historical and recent literature to critically discuss hypotheses about MC formation, morphology, link to star formation, etc. I found it to be dense with information but helpful for reviewing our class discussions in a little more detail.


[(Elia et al, 2022)](https://ui.adsabs.harvard.edu/abs/2022ApJ...941..162E/abstract) *The Star Formation Rate of the Milky Way as seen by Herschel*

In this paper the authors use protostellar clump catalog data from the Herschel Infrared Galactic Plane (Hi-GAL) survey to present a new calculation of the Milky Way’s current star formation rate (SFR), as well as its distribution across the Galactic plane. They select targets whose spectral energy distributions have shapes eligible for a modified black body in the range $160-500 \mu m$ and checked for detection of an emission excess within these targets at $70 \mu m$ for classification as star forming or starless. The authors consider both a few ten thousand protostellar clumps with heliocentric distance determinations and an additional few thousand targets without. To determine each target’s contribution to the SFR, they use theoretical evolutionary tracks from bolometric luminosity vs. mass relations to calculate the final mass of the internal protostar and total elapsed time, accounting for potential distance biases. Using the sources with determined distances, they find the lower limit of the global SFR to be $1.7 \pm 0.6 M_\odot yr^{-1}$, with 84% from within the solar circle and 16% from without. For the targets without distances, they simulate an equivalent number of distances whose distribution follows the one of the known distances and randomly assign them to the sources without distances, repeated 100 times; taking these additional sources into account, the SFR becomes $2.0 \pm 0.7 M_\odot yr^{-1}$. This value is fairly consistent with SFRs in previous literature. The authors also analyze the behavior of the SFR density averaged in concentric rings vs. Galactocentric radius, finding an inner peak at the Central Molecular Zone, followed by a dip corresponding to a shortage of sources, another peak around 5kpc, and a systematic decrease at larger distances; this behavior is qualitatively similar to profiles found in previous work. Ultimately the authors find that the relation between SFR density and molecular gas surface density Galactocentric profile follows a Kennicutt-Schmidt behavior (beyond 3 kpc).

This paper covers a few topics that we’ve discussed in class, such as emission from clouds, the Kennicutt relation, the discrepancy between theoretical Milky Way star formation efficiency and observations, and the complexity of calculating SFR with proxy measurements, not just with the method used to tally source contributions to the global SFR used in this paper but also various other methods mentioned by the authors. This paper seems good for referencing methods and results in historical and recent literature.

[(Brinch, C., et. al, 200Y)](https://www.aanda.org/articles/aa/abs/2007/45/aa8249-07/aa8249-07.html) *A deeply embedded young protoplanetary disk around L1489 IRS observed by the Submillimeter Array**

In this paper, Brinch et. al observationally probe the L1489 IRS system's protostar to search for a Keplerian circumstellar disk. Written in 2007, this paper was one of the earlier proponents of pointing observational tools to low-mass protostars to check for circumstellar disks. They selected this protostar for observation based on the mass of the envelope seen. The authors observed the $HCO^+$ tracer using the Submillimeter Array at Mauna Kea, evidence of a collapsing envelope with an embedded Keplerian disk.      

This paper discusses a couple of relevant topics to our course and is a wonderful way of seeing how observations can lead to theoretical work to further prove the existence of theorized objects. The authors use SEDs and dust continuum observations to put together an image of the disk's shape, as well as find emission peaks for $HCO^+$. Their analysis of the spectra includes discussions of the wings of the emission and the resolution of their data relative to the scales they would expect to see disk structures at!

[(Ohashi, N., et. al, 2023)](https://iopscience.iop.org/article/10.3847/1538-4357/acd384) *Early Planet Formation in Embedded Disks (eDisk). I. Overview of the Program and First Results*

This is the introductory paper to the Early Planet Formation in Embedded Disks (eDisk) program. The goal of this paper is to act as a primer for the multiple papers published out of this survey by discussing the background motivations, the selected protostellar disks, the observations and data reduction, and some exciting novel results.

I used this paper as my first resource when writing for the midterm as it held relevance and recency for Class 0/I disks. I found that this was a good paper to broadly go through. It has discussions of the rotational velocities of disks, showing the importance of Keplerian velocities/rotation to prove that they researchers are looking at disks, and further for seeing the regions that tracers outline (within/outside of the disk region). It further discusses the way in which they selected their observational areas, which were star forming regions, and how they selected sources with available SEDs to grasp whether they were looking at Class 0 or Class I protostars.  

[(Wurster 2021)](https://ui.adsabs.harvard.edu/abs/2021MNRAS.501.5873W/abstract) *Do we need non-ideal magnetohydrodynamic to model protostellar discs?*

This paper aims to reinforce that in order to create a realistic description of protostellar disk formation and evolution we need to include non-ideal MHD processes (e.g. Ohmic resistivity, the Hall effect, and ambipolar diffusion); the paper is meant to provide a more complete discussion of these effects. The author begins with a review of previous observational studies and the motivation for not only investigating the precise contributions of non-ideal MHD effects to the disk but also updating the simple traditional picture of dominance of Ohmic resistivity in the mid-plane close to the star, ambipolar diffusion dominance in the outer disk, and dominance of the Hall effect in between. In this study the author considers idealized disks with various magnetic field strengths and 3 different dust grain distributions, gets non-ideal coefficients for each disk, and relates these to disk properties to determine relative importance within the disk. The author presents an updated picture on the dominance of various non-ideal MHD effects which are dependent on factors such as region within the disk, geometry of the magnetic field, etc. The author goes on to consider self-consistently formed disks and fold in additional elements such as the influence of isolated vs. cluster environments. Ultimately the author concludes that even with idealized disks it is difficult to reproduce the simple traditional picture, and that in most self-consistently modeled scenarios all non-ideal MHD effects play non-trivial roles to some extent.

The structure of the idealized disks in this study involve many of the same disk characteristics that we reviewed in class (e.g. Pringle density profile, scale height, etc.). The paper shows Elsasser and Reynolds numbers, also discussed in class, for the considered disks to quantify the role of non-ideal MHD in disk evolution. I found this paper to be comprehensive in its discussion of non-ideal MHD in disks and their dependence on various factors.

[(Rafikov 2017)](https://ui.adsabs.harvard.edu/abs/2017ApJ...837..163R/abstract) *Protoplanetary Disks as (Possibly) Viscous Disks*

In this paper, the author explores the viscous evolution of protoplanetary disks using 26 disks resolved by ALMA with measured gas and dust masses and accretion rates. The author uses these to get the viscosity parameter $\alpha$ with the goal of differentiating between different mechanisms of angular momentum transport, e.g. viscosity and MHD winds, etc. The author tries 3 different disk temperature assumptions to calculate $\alpha$ but finds that this doesn’t result in large differences for the parameter values, which span a range from $10^{-4} - 0.04$ with no preferred value - indicating that there doesn’t seem to be a single transport mechanism setting the value. The values do not seem to have significant correlations with global disk or stellar characteristics (e.g. disk mass, size, surface density, stellar luminosity, etc.) but shows strong linear correlation with the central mass accretion rate. The author considers a few explanations for why this correlation might exist and not others, such as whether there is an unobserved variable setting the relation.

I found this paper interesting because it discusses many of the disk concepts we’ve covered, such as the LBP diffusion evolution of disks, the Shakura-Sunyaev $\alpha$-prescriptions for disks, and observation methods of recovering disk properties (using UV excess to get accretion rates, using CO line measurements for gas mass). It was interesting to see the use of observational results to try to constrain physical processes in action with the same equations that we studied in class.

[(Paardekooper et. al, 2004)](https://ui.adsabs.harvard.edu/abs/2004A%26A...425L...9P/abstract) *Planets opening dust gaps in gas disks* - Rosario Cecilio-Flores-Elie

This paper uses a two-fluid hydrodynamics simulation to investigate the interaction of gas and dust in a protoplanetary disk in the presence of a massive planet. The study focuses on the conditions for gap formation in the dust fluid. Although a gap in the disk has been seen when planets more massive than 1 Jupiter mass are present, the study also suggests that planets as small as 0.1 Jupiter masses can create gaps in protoplanetary dust disks. The two-fluid hydrodynamics code treated dust as a pressureless fluid governed by conservation laws, with a focus on focusing on drag forces and hight numerical resolution. The difference between the equations for the gas and dust is the absence of pressure in the latter. The dust fluid behaves like a gas that is moving with supersonic velocity. The study focused on measuring several key outcomes, including the formation of an annular gap in the dust disk by a planet and determining the minimum planet mass required for gap formation. Additionally, the study examined the decoupling of larger particles from the gas, the dominance of larger particles in the opacity at millimeter wavelengths, and the enhancement of contrast between the inside of the gap and the gap edges. I chose this paper because it relates to the topics covered in the last two weeks of classes, dust gaps in gas disks, and is one of the older articles I found. 

[(Kley, Nelson, 2012)](https://arxiv.org/abs/1203.1184) *Planet-Disk Interaction and Orbital Evolution* - Rosario Cecilio-Flores-Elie

This paper provides a detailed review of planet-disk interactions, migration modes, and torque influences on planetary evolution, emphasizing the importance of disk-planet interactions in shaping planetary systems. The methodology involves reviewing disk-planet interactions, focusing on migration speed and direction. Various torques, disk properties, and the roles of self-gravity and turbulence are considered. The study discusses the evolution of low-mass and massive planets in protoplanetary disks. Some main findings looked into the challenge of explaining hot Jupiters through models, suggesting large-scale migration. The significance of resonant or near-resonant multiple systems of transiting planets was discovered by the Kepler mission. Overall, the paper does a comprehensive review of the mechanisms and processes governing disk-planet interactions, particularly focusing on how these interactions influence the migration and orbital evolution 0of planets within protoplanetary disks. Some limitations included the need for theoretical, computational, and observational developments to improve models of the planet formation environment, with a focus on structural evolution over time. This paper relates to week 14. 

[(Fedele et. al, 2017)](https://arxiv.org/abs/1711.05185) *ALMA continuum observations of the protoplanetary disk AS 209. Evidence of multiple gaps opened by a single planet* - Rosario Cecilio-Flores-Elie

The paper presents ALMA observations of the protoplanetary system AS 209, revealing the presence of a giant planet responsible for the outer gap and a smaller inner planet indicated by the inner gap. This suggests the rapid formation of giant planets in young systems. The study involved using the dust radiative transfer code DALI to determine dust grain surface density and comparing it with 3D hydrodynamical simulations to understand gap formation in the disk. The presence of multiple gaps in the protoplanetary disk AS 209 was found, with a specific focus on the gap at 62 au and 103 au suggesting a giant planet responsible for the outer gap at approximately 0.8  times the mass of Saturn. The inner planet is suggested to be less than 0.1 Jupiter masses and the presence of a Saturn-like planet at around 95 au in the disk. This raises questions about planet formation at such large distances from the star. A limitation of this study is the exhaustive fit to the data due to the expense of hydrodynamic simulations and the restriction of pebble accretion in the inner disk to the earliest phase of disk evolution. 

[(Beck et. al, 2022)](https://ui.adsabs.harvard.edu/abs/2022A%26A...665A..85B/abstract) *Infrared view of the multiphase ISM in NGC253. I. Observations and fundamental parameters of the ionised gas* - Rosario Cecilio-Flores-Elie

The paper focuses on deriving physical properties such as optical depth, gas density, and metallicity in the central region of the starburst galaxy NGC 253 using spectroscopic observations from various telescopes. This results in values for gas phase abundance estimates for optical depth and determination of ionized gas with a solar metallicity value. The methodology in this study involved utilizing ratios of intergraded line fluxes to derive gas density and metallicity, employing a Monte-Carlo approach to determine line fluxes and statistical uncertainties, and using ratios of MIR and FIR integrated line fluxes to determine ISM parameters. Monte-Carlo was applied to obtain density from line flux rations and propagate uncertainties in the Ne/H abundance ratio. One limitation of this study is that it does not provide a conclusive answer to the major energy input to the ISM due to the presence of various components. This paper connects to Week 1: Phases of the ISM. 

[(Stelzer et. al, 2009)](https://ui.adsabs.harvard.edu/abs/2009A%26A...507..227S/abstract) *A Chandra and Spitzer census of the young star cluster in the reflection nebula NGC 7129*

The authors of this paper conduct a Chandra survey to complete a holistic classification of the YSOs that live in the reflection nebula NGC 7129. They utlize their new observations, which include photometry and SEDs, with both archival optical and infrared data to carry out their data analysis and classification. Using this new data, they are able to identify a population class II / class III YSO candidates that have X-ray sources, and a population of class 0/I and II that do not down to a mass completion limit of 0.5 $M_\odot$. Further disentangling class 0/I and class II disks requires better IR SED information, which is not possible at the time due to the (then) poor resolution of IR instruments. 
 
The relationship to the course material is in how we can use YSO spectra and photometry to both classify them and distinguish them from each other. Infrared wavelengths can help classify Class 0/I and II disks due to the IR excess from dust, for example. The paper also discusses how the nebula is ~ 3 Myr old, right around when the disk disappears, helping contextualize the timescales of protoplanetary disk evolution as mentioned in class. 

[(Steinwandel & Goldberg, 2023 (in review))](https://ui.adsabs.harvard.edu/abs/2023arXiv231011495S/abstract) *Some stars fade quietly: Varied Supernova explosion outcomes and their effects on the multi-phase interstellar medium*

The authors of this paper use high-resolution hydrodynamic dwarf galaxy simulations to test the effect of supernova energy on star formation in the gas disk. The resolution of the simulation goes down to $4 \, M_\odot$ for stars, meaning star particles above that mass are treated as single stars and thus can better represent the dynamics that occur due to their death. The authors test stars exploding at fixed energies at 1e50, 1e51 (fiducial), and 1e52 erg, as well as variable cases. Tests were also done on the modifying the probability of a star exploding instead of the assumed 100% of the time. The authors find that there is little effect on the star formation histories of the sample when compared to the fiducial model, increasing the amount of supernova energy results in a smoother ISM with large bubbles whereas less energy leads to a more filamentary ISM with small bubbles.  

The paper relates to the course material in that it describes a wide variety of the hydrodynamics described in this course, such as the Jeans mass (of gass cells) and conservation of momentum and energy laws. Another clear related topic is supernova energy and how it affects the local structure of the ISM, where Fig. 1 shows the effect of energy on projected disk structure. The graphics also include ISM phase space diagrams ($P / k_{\rm B}$ vs. $n$) which describe as related to homework #2. 

[(Imara et. al, 2021)](https://ui.adsabs.harvard.edu/abs/2021ApJ...918L...3I/abstract) *Touching the Stars: Using High-resolution 3D Printing to Visualize Stellar Nurseries*

In this paper, the authors combine high-resolution giant molecular cloud (GMC) simulations with 3D printing techniques and technologies to produce tangible tools for analysis and outreach. The primary focus of this paper is describing the 3D printing methodology, which includes the creation of bitmaps that will inform which of the two photopolymers to use (opaque or transparent). The basis of the printed simulations include a uniform magnetic field, featuring a fiducial model as well as four high-/low- varied parameters: Mach number, Alfven mach number, virial parameter, and turbulence type. The result consists of a non-distorted visualization of the simulation volume that can be used to test line-of-sight substructure identification. This methodology can also be extended to observed GMCs such as the Orion B molecular cloud. 

This paper ties to various fluid dynamics based concepts discussed throughout the semester, such as the sound speed, mach number, and turbulence of our fluids. We also discussed the Orion B molecular cloud in the context of the Orion Complex in Week 3. 

[(Megeath et. al, 2004)](https://ui.adsabs.harvard.edu/abs/2004ApJS..154..367M/abstract) *Initial Results from the Spitzer Young Stellar Cluster Survey*

The objective of this paper was to report class I and class II candidates found using Spitzer IRAC in four different clouds. The specific targets were cluster in Cepheus C, S171, S140, and NGC 7129. The analyzed sources are objects that were detected in all four observing bands and include photometry and spectra. Classification of YSOs was carried out primarily using their SEDs based on the presence of an infalling envelope (class I), a disk (class II), or a detected photosphere (class III). Although class I/II objects are primarily identified due to the IR excess from circmstellar dust, the classification may consists of mislabeled objects such as class Is might be reddened class II objects. A key finding is that a large fraction of star formation occurs outside dense, clustered regions, where approximately half of the counted stars are found outside the cluster core in NGC 1729. This core, specifically, consists of a majority of class II candidates surrounded by a class I and II candidates.

This paper relates to YSO identification as well as the phases of star formation from class I -> II -> III objects. The paper also discusses the presence of IR excess in the SEDs for class I / II objects, a key feature that we have previously discussed in class.

[(Hennebelle et. al, 2016)](https://iopscience.iop.org/article/10.3847/2041-8205/830/1/L8/pdf) *Magnetically Self-Regulated Formation of Early Protoplanetary Disks*

This paper investigates the formation of early protoplanetary disks during the collapse of magnetized molecular dense cores. The authors emphasize the role of magnetic torque in angular momentum transport, significantly impacting disk formation. By considering the interplay of various timescales associated with magnetized collapse and incorporating non-ideal magnetohydrodynamics (MHD) effects like ambipolar diffusion, they derive a formula for estimating early disk radii. Their theoretical predictions are validated against a series of 3D non-ideal MHD simulations, showing strong agreement. One key finding is the weak dependence of disk sizes on factors such as core mass, turbulence, and magnetic field strength, suggesting minimal variation in disk sizes at the class-0 stage across different environments.

This paper dives into topics we covered in week 7 of class touching on the topic of non-ideal MHD effects, specifically ambipolar diffusion.

[(Lee et. al, 2024)](https://arxiv.org/pdf/2401.02845) *Protoplanetary disk size under non-ideal magnetohydrodynamics:
A general formalism with inclined magnetic field*

This paper proposes a new model that considers both vertical and horizontal fields and their effects on the protoplanetary disk size. This paper explores the formation of protoplanetary disks during the collapse of  dense cores, suggesting a new model to get around magnetic braking emphasizing the significant role of magnetic fields and angular momentum transport. TThe authors derive an analytical expression for early disk radii influenced by magnetic braking and ambipolar diffusion. These theoretical predictions were validated against a suite of 3D non-ideal MHD simulations, covering a range of core masses, turbulence levels, rotation rates, and magnetic intensities. The results indicate a weak dependence of disk size on core mass and other variables, suggesting uniformity in early disk sizes. This work underscores the importance of magnetic regulation in disk formation and aligns theoretical estimates closely with numerical simulations, within a factor of two​he paper concludes by proposing a general formalism for the size of a disk threaded by inclined magnetic field, as a result of self-regulation of angular momentum and field strength by the non-ideal MHD effects. They suggest that such a model can be tested with size observations of a disk population.

This paper covers many topics from week 7 touching base on non-ideal MHD, the magnetic catastrophe and magnetic braking, cores, and protoplanetary disks among many other relevant topics to our course.

[(Wurset et. al, 2018)](https://www.frontiersin.org/articles/10.3389/fspas.2018.00039/full) *The Role of Magnetic Fields in the Formation of Protostellar Discs*

This paper provides an in-depth review of the significant influence of magnetic fields on the formation of protostellar discs. The authors write about into the magnetic braking catastrophe and propose potential solutions such as misalignment between rotation and magnetic fields, turbulence, and non-ideal MHD effects. They underscore the crucial role of non-ideal MHD, which takes into account the weak ionization of molecular clouds, in diffusing the magnetic field and reducing magnetic braking, thereby facilitating the formation of rotationally supported discs. The authors also highlight the importance of numerical simulations in demonstrating the impact of non-ideal MHD effects on disc formation. The paper concludes by emphasizing the need for further observational and theoretical research to fully comprehend the role of magnetic fields in star and disc formation.

[(Li et. al, 2011)](https://iopscience.iop.org/article/10.1088/0004-637X/738/2/180/pdf) *Non-Ideal MHD Effets and Magnetic Braking Catastrophe In Protostellar Disk Formation

This paper delves into the influence of non-ideal MHD effects on the formation of protostellar disks, focusing on the magnetic braking catastrophe that can slow disk formation during the early stages of star development. The authors used a two-dimensional axisymmetric simulation to study how ambipolar diffusion, Ohmic dissipation, and the Hall effect affect disk formation in magnetized, rotating dense cores. The study shows that a slightly strong magnetic field can  prevent the formation of rotationally supported disks (RSDs) during the protostellar accretion phase due to the formation of an ambipolar diffusion-induced accretion shock that traps magnetic flux near the central object. The paper also provides a comprehensive analysis of how non-ideal MHD effects, especially ambipolar diffusion, impact the dynamics of core-collapse and disk formation. The authors also explore scenarios with weaker magnetic fields and find that small-scale disks may form early in the protostellar phase but are often transient and subject to disruption by magnetic braking and outflows. The paper discusses the implications of their findings for observations of protostellar disks and highlights the challenges in forming large-scale RSDs under realistic astrophysical conditions. The authors suggest several potential mechanisms that could facilitate disk formation, including magnetic interchange instabilities, early formation of small disks at high densities, and outflow stripping of the protostellar envelope. This work significantly contributes to the understanding of the complex interplay between magnetic fields and protostellar disk formation, emphasizing the critical role of non-ideal MHD effects in shaping the early stages of star formation. It lays the groundwork for future studies aimed at resolving the magnetic braking catastrophe and understanding the conditions under which protostellar disks can form and evolve.

This paper is an excellent read since it covers everything that engulfs non-ideal MHDs and goes hand-in-hand with everything we did in Week 7.

[(Marchand et. al, 2020)](https://arxiv.org/pdf/2009.01268) *Protostellar collapse: regulation of the angular momentum and onset of an ionic precursor*

This paper dives into angular momentum in star formation. The authors use a 3D simulations to explore the effects of varying the mass of the prestellar dense core, the thermal support, and the dust grain size distribution. The study shows that the mass primarily influences the magnetic braking in the pseudo-disk, while the thermal support affects the accretion rate and consequently the properties of the disk. The authors also highlight the role of non-ideal MHD in regulating angular momentum during protostellar collapse. 

[(Schmidt, 1959)](https://ui.adsabs.harvard.edu/abs/1959ApJ...129..243S/abstract) *The Rate of Star Formation*

This paper (in addition to Kennicutt, 1989) establishes the Kennicutt-Schmidt relation, which postulates that the star formation of very, modern stars (Population I) can be best represented as a power law dependent on the density of interstellar gas. Utilizing the measured stellar luminosity function of the main-sequence stars comprising the Milky Way as well as conservation of mass when considering mass outflows by evolving stars (e.g. red giants evolving into white dwarves), the author develops a proportionality between the gas surface density and the star formation rate of the galaxy. Observational constraints using a measured local ISM density and nearby young stars leadsd to a best fit power law of ~2. Notably there is uncertainty in this measurement due to the helium abundance in the ISM, potentially missing white dwarf observations, the faint end of the luminosity function, and more. 

This paper relates to different aspects of the course material, such as how to calculate distribution functions, how to approximate power laws using observations, the initial mass function, and more. This work is also one part of a historic (commonly used) star formation law as discussed in class. 

[(Kennicutt, 1989)](https://ui.adsabs.harvard.edu/abs/1989ApJ...344..685K/abstract) *The Star Formation Law in Galactic Disks*

This paper (in addition to Schmidt, 1959) utilizes measurements of other spiral (disk-dominated) galaxies to futher contrain the power law index as established in Schmidt, 1959. The Schmidt relation was developed using volumetric density (${\rm SFR} \propto \rho^n $) whereas it takes the form of surface density in this work ($\Sigma_{\rm SFR} \propto \Sigma^n $). The author utilizes a combination of H$\alpha$ HI, and CO emission (proxy for H2) for 15 galaxies averaged over the observed radial disk profile to best determine if there is a "meaningful" global star formation recipe. The authors find multiple interesting results. First, observations of surface brightness as a function of radius break down at the outer disk, which is explained away as the relation describing star formation on a global (not local) scale of the galaxy. Second, the star formation relation is dependent on a critical density. If that critical density is exceeded, the star formation for spiral disk galaxies can be represented by a Schmidt relation with a power law index of $n = 1.3 \pm 0.3$. There are many notable assumptions used in this paper (e.g. using a sample of 15 galaxies), but it is important to emphasize that this relation is based on spiral disk galaxies observations.

This paper relates heavily to the front half of the course material, such as different ways to measure and trace star formation using different elemental signatures as proxies. For example, CO was used as a proxy for H2 (neutral hydrogen) using conversion factors in the column density measurements. This work is also one part of a historic (commonly used) star formation law as discussed in class. 

[(Gnedin & Kravtsov, 2011)](https://ui.adsabs.harvard.edu/abs/2011ApJ...728...88G/abstract) *Environmental Dependence of the Kennicutt-Schmidt Relation in Galaxies*

In this work, the authors provide an alternative form to the Kennicutt-Schmidt relation thata is based off of molecular hydrogen gas as opposed to total gas mass of the ISM. This research was motivated due to recent observations growing the list of limiting case scenarios for the Kennicutt-Schmidt relation, such as in the case of dwarf galaxies with low surface densities (resulting in a power law index of between $ n = 2 - 4$) and for high-redshift ($z > 3$) galaxies (also needing a significantly steeper slope in the power law). Utilizing the information that recent studies show that star formation correlates strongly with the molecular (H2) gas content in the ISM, the authors conduct relatively high-resolution galaxy formulation cosmological simulations to constrain the relationship. The simulation physics include dark matter collapse, self-consistent gas heating and cooling, and radiative transfer via stellar particles. The authors emphasize that tracking stellar radiation is necessary due to the influence on the molecular hydrogen abudance in the disk. Tests were also conducted on varying the dust-to-gas ratio of the galaxy as a free parameter. One of the primary results of this work is parameterized fitting formulae dependent on the molecular hydrogen gas content, dust-to-gas ratio, and the far UV radiation flux. This recipe can be utilized in semi-analytic models of galaxy formation. Another key result is that the atomic hydrogen surface density should increase with redshift.

The work presented ties together well with Homework #2 of the course material, specifically in the treatment of the heating and cooling functions of the ISM. Special emphasis in this work is given towards to the photoionization rate via radiative transfer. Note  that in the appendix, there is additional discussion on the appropriate time scales for star formation as we have discussed in class. 

[(Salpeter, 1955)](https://ui.adsabs.harvard.edu/abs/1955ApJ...121..161S/abstract) *The Luminosity Function and Stellar Evolution*

This work attempts to constrain the initial mass function based off of the galactic luminosity function of main-sequence stars. The work tests multiple hypotheses, such as the local star formation has been constant since the galaxy's inception, and stars only experience notable mass change towards the end of their lifetime. Observations for the luminosity function include faint, main-sequence stars down to a magnitude of $M_v = 13$, and average mass estimates are conducted using an absolute bolometric magnitude. A notable feature that arose when plotting the luminosity function as a function of $M_v$ is that there is a steeper slope for brighter, more massive stars and a flatter slope for the faint-end. This leads to the development of the "original mass function", colloquially known as the initial mass function (IMF). There is a steep drop off in the IMF at $m = 10 \ M_\odot$, which leads to postulation on stellar evolution. These include that the last remnant of a star is a white dwarf, and that most of chemical enriched gas in the interstellar medium is a product of stellar interior physics. Notable caveats include that the IMF is developed using measurements around the local solar neighborhood and may not apply to all galaxies or the Universe as a whole. 

This paper is relevant to our in-class discussion during Week 5 of what different types of IMFs look like, how they were constrained, and where they come into play. 

[(Ostriker & Kim, 2022)](https://ui.adsabs.harvard.edu/abs/2022ApJ...936..137O/abstract) *Pressure-regulated, Feedback-modulated Star Formation in Disk Galaxies*

The authors of this work propose a model of star formation that is not dependent on multiphase gas partitioning, but based on the pressure and feedback of the physical state of the ISM. The weight of a disk can be taken as the sum of the dark matter, gas, and stellar components, to which the sum of these can be approximated as the pressure experienced by a disk in dynamic equilibrium. The stellar feedback is tied directly to this pressure, aka disk weight, which in turn affects the dynamical time and depletion time of the gas in the disk. A star formation rate, in theory, can be then calculated as the ratio of the gas surface density and the (pressure dependent) feedback depedent depletion time. This model of star formation is tested using a suite of high-resolution, multiphase magnetohydrodynamical simulations, resulting in a number of fitting functions expressing the relations between turbulance and pressure under specific conditions. These functions can be used in modern semi-analytic models of galaxy formation, as well as cosmological simulations where star formation is calculated using a subgrid model due to unresolved structure and multiphase gas is not tracked (nor needed to in this model). It is worth mentioned the caveat that this model of star formation is tested using disk galaxies, and further work is being done and should be done to see if it holds up in bulge-dominated systems, dwarfs and irregular galaxies, as well as satellites. 

This paper relates to the course material in describing the timescales that are relevant to the ISM, as well as the various structures and considerations needed to represent it, such as the disk surface density and disk height. 

[(Kirkpatrick et. al, 2024)](https://ui.adsabs.harvard.edu/abs/2024ApJS..271...55K/abstract) *The Initial Mass Function Based on the Full-sky 20 pc Census of ∼3600 Stars and Brown Dwarfs*

This paper set out to determine the inital mass function (IMF) of the local solar neighborhood, out to 20pc. This is work that has been carried out in the past, but typically at higher masses. This paper wanted to include all objects within 20 pc, including the lowest mass brown dwarfs (~5 Jupiter masses). They started by taking a census of all objects, which was made easier through the excellent Gaia DR3 parallaxes available, as well as the many brown dwarf paper which aimed to obtain parallaxes for all brown dwarfs suspected to be withing 20pc, such as Kirkpatrick et al. (2023). The authors then estimated masses for all sources using the current evolutionary models. The authors also attempted to identify hidden binary sources through the use of radial velocity measurements, Gaia RUWE, or spectral evidence, in order to account for the masses of those components. The authors then used evolutionary models for white dwarfs and giant stars in order to determine their main sequence mass. Together, the authors find a 4 part mass functio broken into the high mass stars, intermediate mass stars, low mass stars, and low mass brown dwarfs. While their IMF at high and intermidiate masses agrees with IMF calculations from previous studies, their IMF has an over-abundance of low mass brown dwarfs which is not seen in other IMFS. The authors indicate that if corrected for sample incompleteness, the star to brown dwarf ratio is ~4-1, and find an average mass of 0.41 solar masses. 

We discussed in class both the concept of the IMF, as well as discussed some of its properties. As this paper sets out to construct an IMF, this is highly relevant to the class, and allows for the reader to gain a deeper undertanding of the difficulty involved in this type of work.

(Stock et. al, 2020)]((https://www.aanda.org/articles/aa/pdf/2020/11/aa38897-20.pdf)) *Investigating episodic accretion in a very low-mass young stellar object*

In this paper, the author is discussing ariability in young stellar objects (YSOs)
and whether or not they are capable of strong episodic accretion. They investigated accretion variability in IRS (Infrared Spectrograph) 54, a Class I very low-mass protostar with a mass of $M_{\odot}$ ~ 0.1−0.2 M☉They observed over four epochs (2005, 2010, 2013, and 2014) in the NIR. Epochs 2005 and 2013 were obtained with the Very Large Telescope (VLT) at the European Southern Observatory (ESO) Paranal Observatory in Chile using the Infrared Spectrometer and Array Camera (ISAAC). The 2010 and 2014 data were acquired with the VLT using the Spectrograph for Integral Field Observations in the Near Infrared (SINFONI), an integral field unit (IFU). They used $Br_{\gamma}$ and $Pa_{\Beta}$ hydrogen-recombination lines because these are understood to primarily trace the accretion activity of the young star, rather than outflow activity further out. By examining the SED of each epoch and its variability, they deduced that the changes it exhibits reflect a combination of both an increase in accretion and extinction. A possible explanation for this tandem increase in these two parameters is that the increased accretion and ejection activity during the burst lifts up material into the line of sight and obscures the YSO. 

This is relavent as it discusses how tracers in the disc are used to measure accreation in YSO discs. It also describes the relationship between accretion and extinction in the disc.

[(Budaiev et. al, 2023)](https://ui.adsabs.harvard.edu/abs/2024ApJ...961....4B/abstract) *Protostellar Cores in Sagittarius B2 N and M*

In this paper, the authors observed the Sagittarius B2 cloud, one of the most active star forming regions in the galaxy, with ALMA. The goal was to identify newly forming protostellar cores in order to create an intial mass function for the star forming region. In doing so, the authors hoped to shed some light into what star forming regions might have been like 10 Gyr ago during what is known as the "Cosmic Noon". Sagittarius B2 is though to have conditions similar to those present back then, so it serves as a nice analog for what conditions in cosmic noon might have been like. Using observations from ALMA, the authors identified 410 unique cores, and estimated masses for each one. Their resulting IMF is a power law with alpha=2.4+\-0.1, which is consistent with the power law developed by Kroupa (one of the most cited IMFs). The authors estimate a total star formation rate for the region of 0.013 solar masses/year, which agrees with previous studies observing this area. 

This paper discusses the importance of the IMF and discusses the methods used to derive it, which is very related to our lecture on the IMF which covered some of the same key points. This paper also goes into detail about the difficulty of identifying protostellar cores and estimating their parameters. This ties in nicely with our discussion of protostellar cores, as this is how cores are studied through observations, something we touched on during our theoretical discussions.

 [(Feldmann et. al, 2020)](https://www.nature.com/articles/s42005-020-00493-0) *The link between star formation and gas in nearby galaxies*

Feldmann used two different samples are used in the present analysis, 1012 galaxies selected from the extended GALEX Arecibo SDSS Survey14 (xGASS) and 54 additional galaxies with molecular gas measurements from the CO Legacy Database for GASS13 (xCOLD GASS) that are not in xGASS. They used a joint distribution of star forming rates (SFRs), neutral gas (NGS) , and molecular gas (MGS) masses at fixed $M_{star}$ modeled as a non-Gaussian multivariate distribution with parameters that vary with $M_{star}$. They show that the slope of the SFR – $M_{H2}$ relation is directly linked to the (molecular, neutral, total) gas depletion time, tdep, which is defined as the ratio between (molecular,neutral, total) gas mass and SFR. They also show that typical star-forming galaxies suggest that their SFRs are largely driven by their molecular gas masses, rather than stellar masses. They state the ratio between $M_{H2}$ and SFR in any given galaxy can differ significantly from this average value as their model predicts a probability distribution, not a deterministic mapping, between gas mass and SFR. They state this points to a picture in which physical processes affecting $M_{gas}$ via gas inflows and outflows, such as cosmological gas accretion, hot gas cooling, a galactic fountain, and feedback from stars and black holes regulate the star formation activity and mass growth of typical, nearby galaxies

This is relevant as it is similiar to the conclusion that we had in class, that the molecular gas is what drives SFRs.

 [(Boss and Bodenheimer, 1979)](https://ui.adsabs.harvard.edu/abs/1979ApJ...234..289B/abstract) *Fragmentation in a rotating protostar: a comparison of two three-dimensional computer codes.*

In this paper, Boss and Bodenheimer discuss two hydrodynamic simulation codes of the fragmentation in the collapse of an isothermal rotating protostar, particularly to understand the accuracy and efficiency of two sets of 3-D codes. This is quite an exciting paper, especially since it dives into computing in the 70's. They discuss the technicalities and efficiencies of the two different codes they're using, as well as the differences between their coordinate systems and numerical techniques. They conclude that though there are qualitative similarities in the end results of the codes, there are differences in the quantitative sectors of the results, specifically in the end-point dynamics and smaller structures, likely due to the resolution of the code used.

[Gnacinski, 2003](https://ui.adsabs.harvard.edu/abs/2003AcA....53..379G/abstract)
*Interstellar Silicon Abundance*

This study presents the results of 34 measurements of silicon column density in the ISM obtained using spectra containing the Si II 1808 angstrom line, from Hubble. Some of the major finding from this paper are as follows : silicon abundance in diffuse clouds are 4x lower than the solar value, indicating significant silicon depletion in the interstellar environment. Variations of a specific extinction feature (2174 angstrum bump) has no correlation to silicon abundance, and may be primarily linked to carbon abundance. There is a smooth variation of silicon abundance with respect to fractional abundance of molecular hydrogen - this indicates that silicon abundance is connected to physical conditions of interstellar gas. The high condensation temperature of silicon leads to a persistence of silicate grains in the ISM.

For my final project, I am looking back at homework 1, where we varied parameters to see how it affected the features of an ISM extinction curve. I am taking that to the next level and seeing how different parameters affect different extinction curves throughout the literature. To do so, it is important to build a foundation of what elements and compositions are abundant, and how the literature treats varying these parameters. This is a foundational paper if someone were to begin researching dust composition.

[(Gonzalez et. al, 2012)](https://www.aanda.org/articles/aa/pdf/2012/11/aa18806-12.pdf) *Planet gaps in the dust layer of 3D protoplanetary disks II. Observability with ALMA*

The author uses 3D, two-fluid Smoothed Particle Hydrodynamics (SPH) simulations of a planet embedded
in a gas+dust T Tauri disk for different planet masses and grain sizes. They then pass the resulting dust distributions to the Monte Carlo radiative transfer code MCFOST to construct synthetic images in the ALMA wavebands. This allowed them to provide predictions of observations with ALMA and examine the detectability of planetary gaps. They provide two cases,the “dynamic” case where they use the true spatial distribution of dust of different grain sizes obtained from the hydrodynamic simulations and the “well-mixed” case where they simply use the spatial distribution of gas and assume that the dust follows it in order to check the validity of the “wellmixed” hypothesis. They found that for average sky conditions, the wavelength giving the best signal to noise (S/N) to be 850 $\mu m$  when phase noise is neglected or 1.3 mm, with slightly lower performance, when it is included. Overall, they demonstrate that the gap carved by a moderately massive planet of one Jupiter mass at large orbital radii will be well within reach of ALMA. 

This is relevant to what we discussed about how planets "clear out" the dust in the disc within their orbits.

[Chambers, 2024](https://ui.adsabs.harvard.edu/abs/2024ApJ...966...40C/abstract)
*Large Fluctuations within 1 au in Protoplanetary disks*

This study looks at the time evolution of protoplanetary disks, and focuses on the rapid fluctuations within 1.5au that occur due to a sharp increase in viscosity. The main takeaway from this paper isn’t the fluctuations themselves, but the implications of them. For example, large temperature fluctuations in the inner disk have implications on  planetesimal formation and protoplanet migration. This occurs due to pressure maxima appearing and disappearing. Within these, there are traps where planetesimals can form, and protoplanets can migrate due to disk tide. The lifetime of these traps is limited to the period that the fluctuations cycle, between decades and ~1kyr. Another point is that the short lifetimes and rapid speed of the waves will not let a substantial concentration of pebbles to accrue. There are also slower waves that result from the fluctuations (period of ~10kyr that may be better suited for streaming instability and other processes to operate. 

In week 10 we began discussing protoplanetary disks and accretion. This paper extends on that, by talking about how fluctuations in the protoplanetary disk can affect various mechanisms that act within it. This adds to the foundation and equations of the mechanisms that we learned in class.

[(Burkert and Bodenheimer, 2000)](https://iopscience.iop.org/article/10.1086/317122/meta) *Turbulent Molecular Cloud Cores: Rotational Properties*

In this paper, Burkert and Bodenheimer investigate the rotational characteristics of molecular cloud cores especially with relevance to the effect of turbulence on these cores. They take observational data and compare them with numerical simulations, studying the angular velocity, specific angular momentum, and turbulence. They found that turbulence has an immense effect on the rotation and angular momentum of the cores, and find a separate way of confirming the existence of a disk outside of purely dynamical arguments.

This is related to what we learned towards the end of the course, specifically with respect to how a core-collapse model can be verified by using the Keplerian velocity of the disk.

[(Woitke et. al, 2016)](https://www.aanda.org/articles/aa/pdf/2016/02/aa26538-15.pdf) *Consistent dust and gas models for protoplanetary disks*

In this paper, the authors propose new standard dust opacities for disk models, we present a simplified treatment of polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons (PAHs) in radiative equilibrium which is sufficient to reproduce the PAH emission features, and they suggest using a simple yet physically justified treatment of dust settling. They then roughly adjusted parameters to obtain a model that predicts continuum and line observations that resemble typical multi-wavelength continuum and line observations of Class II T Tauri stars. They also study the impact of all model parameters such as disk mass, disk extension and shape, dust settling, dust size and opacity, and gas/dust ratio on all mainstream continuum and line observables, in particular on the SED, mm-slope, continuum visibilities, and emission lines. They found that the most important conclusions were that disk shape matters, dust size is important, a new dust standard opacities have been developed and that PAHs can have important effects on the disk radiative transfer. Their results results demonstrate that the various continuum and line observables probe the physical conditions at very different radii and different heights in the disk. Thus, only a combination of suitable multi-wavelength dust and gas observations can break the various degeneracies, for example those in SED modelling, and can lead to more reliable disk diagnosis. 

This is related to the parameters of the disk that we discussed in class and how they affect the observations that we can perform on disks.

[(Lee et. al, 2021)](https://iopscience.iop.org/article/10.3847/1538-4357/ac235d/pdf) *Universal Protoplanetary Disk Size under Complete Nonideal Magnetohydrodynamics: The Interplay between Ion-neutral Friction, Hall Effect, and Ohmic Dissipation*

This paper explores the impact of nonideal (MHD) on the formation and size regulation of protoplanetary disks. The authors present a model that predicts a small disk size under different initial conditions involving subsolar mass and moderate magnetization. The study delves into the roles of ambipolar diffusion, the Hall effect, and ohmic dissipation, providing insights into how these factors influence disk size and behavior. The model successfully explains observed phenomena in numerical simulations, including the distinct outcomes of parallel and antiparallel alignments between rotation and magnetic fields. Key conclusions include the formation of bimodal disk behaviors and the eventual dominance of the toroidal magnetic field. This work contributes significantly to the understanding of disk formation dynamics, addressing previous theoretical and observational challenges in the field​. This is relevant to the work we did in week 7 of the course.

[(Lee and Hennebelle, 2021)](https://arxiv.org/pdf/1711.00316) *Stellar mass spectrum within massive collapsing clumps I. Influence of the initial conditions*

The authors delve into the formation of stars within massive collapsing clumps, examining the impact of initial conditions on the resulting star distribution. Through numerical experiments, they systematically varied the initial density and turbulent velocity and adapted an existing analytical model to collapsing clouds. Their findings revealed two support regimes: a thermally dominated regime and a turbulence-dominated regime. The authors concluded that the mass spectra for the most compact clouds resemble the observed initial mass function, but the distribution exponent is shallower than the expected Salpeter exponent. This research significantly contributes to the understanding of star formation processes and the influence of initial conditions on the resulting distribution of stars which is relevant to weeks 1-9 as this paper explores all the topics from those weeks

[(Stamatellos et. al, 2007)](https://ui.adsabs.harvard.edu/abs/2007MNRAS.382L..30S/abstract) *Brown dwarf formation by gravitational fragmentation of massive, extended protostellar discs*

In this paper, the authors wished to explore a possible formation mechanism of brown dwarfs, sub-stellar objects with masses below the hydrogen burning mass limit. They discuss how the most widely accepted explanations typically involve pre-protostellar cores being ejected from their natal environments, stripping them of the matter necessary to gain enough mass for fusion. In simulations, this tends to produce brown dwarfs with velocities too high compared to those from observations, and the models have a hard time producing the correct clustering and binary star populations observed. The authors explored if it was possible for fragmentation of protoplanetary disks due to gravitational instability to produce brown dwarfs. They ran a hydrodynamical simulation of a 0.7 solar mass star with a 0.5 solar mass disk, and watched the system evolve over time. Their simulation produced 11 total fragments, with two forming low mass stars, several producing brown dwarfs, and two producing high mass gas giant planets. The authors conclude that this is a viable method to produce sub-stellar objects

This material is very relavant to the discussion had in class about gravitational instability within disks. This paper calculated the Toomre Q parameter, which was discussed in class, and this paper is an excellent source to see how Q is used in real research. 

[(Lebreuilly et. al., 2021)](https://iopscience.iop.org/article/10.3847/2041-8213/ac158c/meta) *Protoplanetary Disk Birth in Massive Star-Forming Clumps: The Essential Role of the Magnetic Field*

In this paper, Lebreuilly et. al. investigate the formation of protoplanetary disks and emphasize the importance of the magnetic field (and in particular, the non-ideal MHD physics such as ambipolar diffusion) and raditive transfer within the core collapse model of a $1000M_\odot$. They look into three models and find that without a magnetic field, it is impossible to reach the expected Class 0 disk structure.

Aleksandra made it quite clear to us in class how important a magnetic field is to the structure of a disk, as well as how dust is influenced by magnetic field effects!

[(Kratter et. al, 2016)](https://ui.adsabs.harvard.edu/abs/2016ARA&A..54..271K/abstract) *Gravitational Instabilities in Circumstellar Disks*

This paper is a review of disks around young stars, focusing specifically on the growth of gravitational instabilities (GI). The authors first begin with an overview of the observational techniques used to identify disks, as well as a description of the evidence collected at the time. Next, the authors introduce the concept of GI using both the Toomre Q parameter, as well as the cooling time of the disk vs rotational period. The authors explore in detail what conditions cause this GI to grow, eventually leading to fragmentation of the disk. 

This paper is an excellent resource to use in conjunction with our lectures both on disk observations, as well as instabilities. As this is a review paper, extra care is taken to explain the concepts, further expanding on the material covered in class.

[(Marchand et. al., 2016)](https://www.aanda.org/articles/aa/abs/2016/08/aa26780-15/aa26780-15.html) *Chemical solver to compute molecule and grain abundances and non-ideal MHD resistivities in prestellar core-collapse calculations*

In this paper, Marchand et. al. present a chemical solver that calculates the abundances of molecules and grains, which in turn compute non-ideal MHD resistivities relevant to core collapse simulations. The solver tool involves grain-surface reactions (such as evaporation) and allows the user to look into the chemical composition of the collapsing cloud. The table of the results range across temperatures and densities, making it useful for people to take these values and incorporate them into their disk formation simulations. In the end, the group also finds that it is relevant to incorporate this solver into models as the chemical equilibrium time scale can vary depending on the type of molecules and conditions within the collapsing core.

This paper incorporates more of what we learned in class about the importance of a magnetic field's impact on a star-and-planet-forming system, but on a much smaller scale (which in turn, impacts the larger sclae global model). 

[Mathis, Rumpl, and Nordsieck, 1977](https://adsabs.harvard.edu/full/1977ApJ...217..425M)
*The size distribution of interstellar grains*

This is *THE* MRN paper that Aleksandra mentioned in class. In this paper, Mathis, Rumpl, and Nordsieck dive into the size distribution of interstellar dust grains. They take into account observational data, while also considering theoretical modeling of extinction curves of data across different spectral ranges. They fit data with particle size distributions across graphite, enstatite, olivine, silicon carbide, iron, and magnetite.

This paper discusses techniques used to investigate extinction curves, such as the reasons why certain elements and molecules were looked into, and how the optical depth of a column of molecules was studied. 

[Toomre, 1964](https://ui.adsabs.harvard.edu/abs/1964ApJ...139.1217T/abstract)
*On the gravitational stability of a disk of stars*

This paper investigates the gravitational stability of a rotating stellar system. Toomre emphasizes the fact that a thin, smooth, rotating disk is vulnerable to extensive, violent instabilities, unless the stars possess enough  random motion relative to each other. Toomre also discusses that rotation, increased disk thickness , and the presence of random motion are crucial for suppressing instabilities. The paper then goes through the numerical calculations and theory involved that support these claims. To apply this theory, Toomre discusses the findings for the observed smooth distribution of stars in the galactic disk, and provides estimates for the required radial velocity dispersion to make the disk stable. 

In week 12 of class we discussed disk instability. More specifically, we discussed the mechanisms and equations for different contributors to instability. Although this paper is old, I find it very interesting to see it discuss some of the instabilities we talked about in class, and extend that discussion into what would potentially be required to counteract them. 

[(Zhao et. al, 2020)](https://arxiv.org/pdf/2004.01342) *Formation and Evolution of Disks around Young Stellar Objects*

 In this paper the authors examine the latest findings in the field of protoplanetary disk formation, focusing on both observational and theoretical advancements. They begin with an analytical overview of the fundamental physical processes that govern disk formation, emphasizing the roles of gravity, thermal pressure, rotation, magnetic fields, and turbulence. The review is structured to cover low-mass and high-mass star formation, with separate sections dedicated to gravitational instability, outflows, and jets. Key studies highlighted include Hennebelle et al. (2008), who investigate magnetic processes in collapsing dense cores, and Hirota et al. (2017), who provide insights into disk-driven rotating bipolar outflows. The authors also discuss limitations in current observational and numerical methodologies and suggest directions for future research, particularly in synthetic observations that bridge the gap between simulations and empirical data. Overall, this paper is an excellent contender for a review of the material from week 7, as it tuches on all of its topics.

[Youdin and Goodman, 2005] (https://iopscience.iop.org/article/10.1086/426895/pdf)
*Streaming Instabilities in Protoplanetary Disks*

In this paper (which, wild, this was written before I was cognizant and I am now thinking about this), Youdin and Goodman discuss the basis of the streaming instability theory. They examine the interactions between streams of dust and gas, and tackle the issue of radial and orbital drift, showing that radial drift seeks to help the issue of dust coagulation with respect to planet formation, as it allows particles to meet and pile up efficiently, but that the orbital drift is not clearly represented in their model and is oversimplified in geometry. Still, the paper does its best to push an argument for streaming instability to be a solution to early-stage planet formation woes, and confirms that the growth rate of the coagulated material is faster than the drift rate of the same material.

In class we discussed how streaming instabilities are an aerodynamic solution to the issue of dust growth within a protoplanetary disk, especially when it comes to fighting against collisional effects such as fragmentation or bouncing.

[(Ribas et. al, 2020)](https://www.aanda.org/articles/aa/pdf/2020/10/aa38352-20.pdf) *Modeling protoplanetary disk SEDs with artificial neural networks*

They investigated the spectral energy distributions (SEDs) of 23 protoplanetary disks located in the Taurus-Auriga star-forming region by employing detailed disk models in conjunction with a Bayesian approach. To achieve this, they integrated these models with artificial neural networks, significantly accelerating their performance. This methodology enabled them to rigorously compare $\alpha$-disk models with observational data while accounting for various uncertainties and degeneracies. Their analysis revealed that many of the protoplanetary disks exhibit high viscosities and accretion rates, findings that conflict with recent measurements indicating low turbulence levels within these disks. This discrepancy suggests that viscosity might not be the primary mechanism for angular momentum transport in protoplanetary disks. Instead, alternative processes such as disk winds could play a crucial role in this transport. Additionally, they observed that the disk masses derived from their SED models are consistently higher than those inferred from (sub)millimeter flux measurements alone. This discrepancy implies that a portion of the disk emission may still be optically thick at (sub)millimeter wavelengths. This finding has significant implications for disk population studies, as it helps to resolve previous observational inconsistencies between the masses of protoplanetary disks and the masses of exoplanetary systems.

This coincides with our decussion on disk dynamics and the comparisons between models and observations

[(Bigiel et. al, year)](https://ui.adsabs.harvard.edu/abs/2008AJ....136.2846B/abstract) *The Star Formation Law in Nearby Galaxies on Sub-Kpc Scales*

Using a sample of nearby galaxies (18), the authors of this paper attempt to analyze the relationship between the star formation rate, HI, and H2 surface densities at a very high resolution. The galaxy sample, consisting of those found within 15 Mpc of the Milky Way, is split into two types: HI dominated, and spirals (with H2 dominated centers). A multi-wavelength study is done using HI (21 cm emission) and H2 (CO emission) maps for the gas, and FUV and 24 $\mu {\rm m}$ maps for SFR. A combination of non-overlapping resolution limits and radial profiles are used for analysis. The authors find a strong correlation between $\Sigma_{\rm SFR}$ and $\Sigma_{\rm H2}$, but note that a power law fit a la the Schmidt Law would result in a power law index of ~1 in the sample of spirals. There is also little correlation, and thus little relation, between SFR and HI gas in this galaxy sample. Note that although the sample count is quite low, the sample was limited galaxies where high-resolution imaging across multiple bands is for the most part already available. 

This paper relates to our in-class discussion of how galactic star formation is measured, and while different emission mechanisms and gas contents can be chosen to calculate SFR, we need to treat the work carefully and with a representative sample. 

[(Pinilla et. al, 2022)](https://arxiv.org/pdf/1410.5963) *Gas and dust structures in protoplanetary disks hosting multiple
planets
*

Transition disks, characterized by dust-depleted inner regions, are thought to represent an intermediate stage in the disk dispersal process, potentially involving active planet formation. Recent millimeter observations of these disks reveal complex, asymmetric structures where dust particles of different sizes do not always coexist spatially. These features likely result from particle trapping and grain growth in pressure bumps caused by interactions with planetary companions, suggesting the presence of multiple planets in some disks, such as SR 21. Their study aims to explore the gas and dust distributions in a disk hosting two massive planets, using two-dimensional hydrodynamical and one-dimensional dust evolution simulations. Their simulations generate spectral energy distributions and synthetic images in polarized intensity at 1.6 $\mu m$ and sub-millimeter wavelengths (850 $\mu m$ ). The results indicate that planets can induce particle trapping, with the necessary conditions depending on disk viscosity and dust fragmentation efficiency. High viscosity ($\alpha_{turb}$ = $10^{−2}$) requires a planet more massive than 5 $M_{Jup}$ and low-efficiency dust fragmentation to create ring-like features observed in millimeter wavelengths. Conversely, lower viscosity ($\alpha_{turb}$ = $10^{−3}$) limits the planet mass to less than 5 $M_{Jup}$. The findings also suggest that a smooth distribution of micron-sized grains, seen in scattered light, requires a specific combination of planet mass and turbulence. High disk viscosity supports the replenishment of the cavity with micron-sized dust, while low viscosity leads to low-amplitude azimuthal asymmetries in the gas distribution, likely caused by disk eccentricity rather than long-lived vortices.

This related to the material towards the end of class about how the dust in the disk is dissappated over time from planet formation.

[(Lebreuilly et. al., 2023)](https://arxiv.org/pdf/2309.05397) *Influence of protostellar outflows on star and protoplanetary disk
formation in a massive star-forming clump*

In this paper, Lebreuilly et. al. try to better understand the impact that jet outflows have on star and planet formation within the broader context of star forming clumps. They use the RAMSES code to simulate at a $1000M_\odot$ molecular clump from which they assume star and planet formation occur. They use two models, one incorporating the outflows and one without. They see that the star formation efficiency is slowed down in the presence of outflows by up to 20% as the outflows provide higher values for kinetic and magnetic energy to the cloud. They also reduce the temperature of protoplanetary disks.

We have previously discussed jet outflows within the protoplanetary disk context, such as within the infalling phase, and how such emission can be seen (Herbig-Haro) - which likely influenced this paper.


[(Boquien et. al, 2014)](https://www.aanda.org/articles/aa/pdf/2014/11/aa24441-14.pdf) *Impact of star formation history on the measurement of star
formation rates*
Accurately measuring star formation across the Universe is crucial for understanding the processes of galaxy formation and evolution. However, determining the star formation rate (SFR) of galaxies presents significant challenges due to the complexities involved. The authors study focuses on how variable star formation histories affect SFR measurements. By utilizing 23 state-of-the-art hydrodynamical simulations of galaxies at redshifts 1 < z < 2 on the main sequence, combined with the CIGALE spectral energy distribution modeling code, they generate synthetic spectra every 1 Myr. These spectra account for both stellar populations and nebular emission, allowing for a detailed analysis. Using these synthetic spectra, they estimate SFRs through classical methods and compare these estimates with the true SFRs known from the simulations. Their findings reveal that classical SFR estimators, typically calibrated over a 100 Myr timescale, tend to overestimate the SFR. Specifically, these estimators overestimate the SFR by approximately 25% in the far-ultraviolet and by about 65% in the U band. The primary reasons for these biases are twofold: the inclusion of contributions from stars with lifespans longer than 100 Myr and the variations in the SFR over timescales longer than a few tens of Myr. Additionally, while rapid fluctuations in the SFR increase the uncertainty in determining the instantaneous SFR, they do not significantly impact the long-term average SFR. This suggests that short-term variations, though impactful in specific instances, balance out over longer periods. The observed discrepancies between the true and estimated SFRs are important because they may partially explain the tension between the integrated SFR density and the stellar mass density at given redshifts. Understanding these discrepancies is vital for improving our models of galaxy evolution and ensuring that our measurements align more closely with the true star formation activities within galaxies.

This relates to our discussion on SFR and the different parameters used to determine what models should be used.
